J. Michael Kosterlitz (Harrison E. Farnsworth Professor of Physics, Brown University, and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics), an Ising-Onsager Distinguished Lecture 
                             Introductory Remarks by Lai-Sheng Wang, Chair, Chemistry Department
                               Introduction by Bill Camp (Sandia Labs and Intel, emeritus)
               Introductory Remarks by Thomas Ising, Ernst Ising’s son
                Introductory Remarks by Richard Stratt, introducing Prof Kosterlitz
               
Professor Kosterlitz’s lecture will also serve as the inaugural lecture in Brown University’s new Ising-Onsager Distinguished Lecture Series. His research areas include condensed matter, phase transitions, and Ising spin glasses. The initial proposal for this lecture series (“Proposal for the Ernst Ising Distinguished Lecture Series”) was made to Brown University’s Dean of the Faculty on May 20, 2011 by Sorin and colleagues from the Departments of Chemistry and Physics. The Ising-Onsager Distinguished Lecture Series builds on and revises that proposal.


This series honors the memory of Lars Onsager, Brown University Professor of Chemistry from 1928-1933 and winner of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1968. In 1944, Onsager obtained the phase transition and exact solution for the 2D planar Ising Model (Ising ferromagnetic 2D plane grid). His seminal exact mathematical proof of the 2D planar Ising model partition function formula is considered one of the most extraordinary mathematical tour de force proofs in statistical physics. Answering the call to “make [the proof] human”, a dream team of mathematicians and physicists, including Katz, Ward, Feynman, Hurst, Kasteleyn, and Temperley attempted until 1975 to generalize Onsager’s proof to three dimensions, but without success. Kac and Ward, with contributions from Feynman, obtained a combinatorial proof of the Onsager theorem. In 2000, Sorin published the paper "Statistical Mechanics, Three-Dimensionality and NP-completeness. I. Universality of Intractability for the Partition Function of the Ising Model Across Non-Planar Lattices" at the Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC). His paper showed, for several Ising spin glass models, that for every non-planar (and therefore every 3D) model, computing the partition function is NP-complete. The proofs were axiomatic: Non-planarity plus Translational Invariance implies NP-completeness.
